F063 - Police Firearms

1 In addition to the circumstances set out in General Instruction F61, the Police may use firearms:

(a) to destroy animals in circumstances as set out in the Manual of Best Practice (Stock at Large);

(b) for training purposes.

2 The possession of Police firearms by people other than sworn 'members of Police' or non-sworn members of Police as authorised under Section 3, Arms Act 1983, is strictly prohibited.

(a) The full provisions of the Arms Act 1983 apply to all individuals, including sworn and warranted non-sworn members not acting in the course of their duties, other non-sworn members and those who are not employees of Police, including members of the media and family members.

(b) Members of the Mountain Safety Council engaged in delivering firearms safety training may be in possession of Police rifles with the specific approval of the National Manager : Operations.

(c) An individual who is not a member of Police as defined by the Arms Act 1983 may not be supplied with a pistol or restricted weapons except where they have specific statutory approval.

F060 - Carrying of Firearms by Police

(1) The New Zealand Police is generally an unarmed service. It is recognised however that firearms need to be available quickly, easily and safely. The principle of minimum personal carriage and minimum visibility of firearms and related equipment is to be applied at all times.

(2) Firearms are not to be carried on the person as a matter of general practice, but may be carried in authorised police vehicles to ensure they are available if needed.

(3) District Commanders may authorise the carriage of police approved firearms in police vehicles, as necessary to ensure members have ready access to firearms should the circumstances dictate. NCO patrols, first response units, CIB patrols, dog patrols, and single crewed patrols are examples where such authorisation should be considered.

(4) Police vehicles used to carry police firearms on a regular basis are to be fitted with firearm security cabinets. Such cabinets are to be of a type approved by the National Manager : Operations. This does not apply to vehicles used by members of an Armed Offender Squad or the Special Tactics Group.

(5) The need for security of firearms and cabinet keys cannot be too highly stressed and to this end District Commanders shall consider the fitting of an alarm to those vehicles used to carry firearms on a regular basis. In any case District Commanders shall issue directions as to the security of such firearms and cabinet keys. Such directions shall include:

(i) strict control procedures to ensure that police firearms stored in cabinets and cabinet keys are secure at all times;

(ii) the appointment of a Commissioned Officer or Senior Sergeant to be responsible for ensuring that district orders and general instructions are being complied with and to carry out spot inspections in addition to routine checks by supervisors.

(6) Members may carry police issue firearms on the person when there is clear and specific evidence that a risk of encountering any of the circumstances referred to in General Instruction F61 exists. Carriage is to be authorised by a District Commissioned Officer or NCO or Police Communications Centre Commissioned Officer or NCO when practical to do so. If an authorising officer is not available members may exercise their own discretion, but shall advise their supervisor at the first reasonable opportunity.

(7) Commissioned Officers and NCOs may carry police issue firearms on their person in the circumstances outlined in (6) above without reference to higher authority. The nearest Police Communication Centre Commissioned or Non Commissioned Officer must be advised.

(8) Members may also carry police issue firearms on their person when:

(a) performing airport policing duties at any airport that has been 'security designated' under the Civil Aviation Act 1990;

(b) performing duty as a member of the Diplomatic Protection Squad and authorised by the Commissioned Officer in Charge of that Squad;

(c) performing duty as a member of an Armed Offenders Squad or the Special Tactics Group;

(d) performing duty as described in General Instruction F63;

(e) pursuant to a written operation instruction authorised by a Commissioned Officer;

(f) authorised by a District Commander.

(9) A member who may be required to be armed shall not consume alcohol within a reasonable time before commencing duty, or during any period of duty. This includes periods while on standby.
